First draft of Navigation documentation (#20)
canopy-iiif/docs: pages/content/navigation.mdx

# Navigation

Navigation is configured from `_meta.json` files located in `/content`.

## Primary Navigation

Canopy IIIF creates it's primary navigation at build time from `/content/_meta_.json`. Each link will have a `path` and `text` key. A `path` value will resolve to a file or directory under `/content` or `/src/pages`. The `text` key will be what's displayed in the navigation bar. The order of the links in the array will be the order they appear in the navigation.

```json filename="/content/_meta_.json"
[
  {
    "path": "/works",
    "text": "Works"
  },
  {
    "path": "/metadata",
    "text": "Metadata"
  },
  {
    "path": "/about",
    "text": "About"
  }
]
```

<Box m="9" my="6">
  ![canopy home page](/examples/content-navigation-primary.png)
</Box>

<Callout type="info">
  Canopy IIIF provides the **Work** and **Metadata** pages out of the box,
  pre-configured. Therefore you will not see markdown files for these pages
  under the `/content` directory, though their links will resolve.
</Callout>

For those looking for a more detailed explanation of how the `path` value is resolved, see below, otherwise skip the Technical Explanation below.

> <Callout>
>   **Technical explanation**: The `path` value follows
>   [NextJS's](https://nextjs.org/docs/pages/building-your-application/routing/pages-and-layouts)
>   `pages` routing convention. The `path` value `/works` will map to
>   `/src/pages/works/index.tsx`. The `path` value`/metadata` will map to
>   `/src/pages/metadata.tsx`.
> </Callout>

Reviewer: I like the technical callout here. Just keeping use of Next.js consistent.

```suggestion
<Callout>
  **Technical explanation**: The `path` value follows the
  [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/docs/pages/building-your-application/routing/pages-and-layouts)
  `pages` routing convention. The `path` value `/works` will map to
  `/src/pages/works/index.tsx`. The `path` value`/metadata` will map to
  `/src/pages/metadata.tsx`.
</Callout>
```

### Custom Content

> Most users will want to add navigation for custom content to their site. For example, the **About** page, or creating a new page. This is done by creating a markdown file under `/content` and adding a link to the primary navigation (as seen above). For example, to add a page called **About** to the primary navigation, create a markdown file called `index.mdx` under `/content/about`.

Reviewer 2: Since `About` already exists by default, maybe we should write this for a custom content section like `Example` or something like that? Not sure if my suggestion is good though so feel free to ignore.

```suggestion
Most users will want to add navigation for custom content to their site. For example, a user may want to customize the navigation on the **About** page to better fit the content of their site or create a brand new page with custom navigation. This is done by creating a markdown file under `/content` and adding a link to the primary navigation (as seen above). For example, to add a page called **Example** to the primary navigation, create a markdown file called `index.mdx` under `/content/example`.
```

> Most users will want to add navigation for custom content to their site. For example, the **About** page, or creating a new page. This is done by creating a markdown file under `/content` and adding a link to the primary navigation (as seen above). For example, to add a page called **About** to the primary navigation, create a markdown file called `index.mdx` under `/content/about`.

Reviewer: This feels odd as the `content/about` directory is already baked-in. It could be nice to reference a new custom page History at the top level `content/history.mdx` to differentiate but I'm not sure what to do. I think this type of stuff could be better defined in the guide in detail but can't hurt to hint at here.

<Callout type="info">
  If creating a new page, try copying the content from `src/pages/about` into
  `src/pages/{your_page_name}`. This will give you a good starting point for
  your new page.

> </Callout>

Reviewer: I like this, what if we use the FileTree component in nextra to help describe this? https://nextra.site/docs/guide/built-ins/filetree

## Secondary Navigation

### Top Level

> Secondary navigation may be defined from within a `_meta.json` file located within a subdirectory of `/content`. Examining the **About** example...

Reviewer 2: To keep from bringing in whatever `About` might look like, what about this?

```suggestion
Secondary navigation may be defined from within a `_meta.json` file located within a subdirectory of `/content`. For example, secondary navigation within **About** might look like this:
```

> ### Top Level
> 
> Secondary navigation may be defined from within a `_meta.json` file located within a subdirectory of `/content`. Examining the **About** example...

Reviewer: Top Level seems to contrast to much with Secondary. What if we call this Content Navigation? Also, a little beef.

```suggestion
### Content Navigation

An example directory `content/about` is included in a new Canopy project. Implementers may want to modify navigation to match their custom content. This directory has its own `_meta.json` file that defines navigation at this level.
```

```json filename="/content/about/_meta_.json"
[
  {
    "path": "/about",
    "text": "About"
  },
  {
    "path": "/about/example",
    "text": "Markdown Example"
  }
]
```

Which will render _top-level_ secondary navigation links **About** and **Markdown Example**:

<Box m="9" my="6">
  ![canopy home page](/examples/content-navigation-secondary.png)
</Box>

These **About** secondary navigation links are wired up to route to the corresponding markdown file. For example, clicking on **Markdown Example** will route to `/content/about/example`.

### Subnavigation

> _Child_ subnavigation links (ie. "Use Cases", "Features", and "Colophon") are automatically generated from markdown `h2` headings in it's parent markdown file. For example, the About page might look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Internal page navigation links (ie. "Use Cases", "Features", and "Colophon") are automatically generated for _heading level 2_ elements (`## Heading`) in your Markdown content. For example, the About page might look like this:
```

```markdown filename="/content/about/index.mdx"
# About

> Using a single [IIIF Presentation Collection](https://iiif.io/api/presentation/3.0/#overview-collection) as a data source, Canopy IIIF (Canopy) generates a browseable, searchable, customizable, and contextually-driven static site using Next.js without duplicating content.

Reviewer: I would call this Internal Page Navigation.

<FileTree>
  <FileTree.Folder name="content" defaultOpen>
    <FileTree.Folder name="about" defaultOpen>
      <FileTree.File name="_meta.json" />
      <FileTree.File name="index.mdx" />
      <FileTree.File name="example.mdx" />
    </FileTree.Folder>
  </FileTree.Folder>
</FileTree>

For example, to add a page called **Essays** to the primary navigation, create a markdown file called `index.mdx` under `/content/essays`.

<FileTree>
  <FileTree.Folder name="content" defaultOpen>
    <FileTree.Folder name="about" defaultOpen>
      <FileTree.File name="_meta.json" />
      <FileTree.File name="index.mdx" />
      <FileTree.File name="example.mdx" />
    </FileTree.Folder>
    <FileTree.Folder name="essays" defaultOpen>
      <FileTree.File name="_meta.json" />
      <FileTree.File name="index.mdx" />
      <FileTree.File name="page1.mdx" />
      <FileTree.File name="page2.mdx" />
    </FileTree.Folder>
  </FileTree.Folder>

> </FileTree>

Author: Yep, I hear you @mathewjordan I'll leave for now, but probably move this over to the Guide this morning...
